
I originally wanted to go to the Azores. Hiking, enjoying the nature, maybe even
swimming in the sea. But the weather forecast was showing a storm system
crossing the islands just when I wanted to be there. And so I shifted my focus
on Madeira.

Madeira is an island a bit to the south-east of the Azores, of similar origin
(they are both volcanic island groups), with similar weather, and equally many
options for enjoying the nature. Madeira was actually a bit easier to get to as
there are direct flights from Zürich, Switzerland. It wasn’t the cheapest
flight, but I can’t complain as I was booking the flight on a Friday afternoon
and departing the next day at 06:30am.

That gave me about 12 hours to plan what to do, and more importantly what to
pack (note that the 12 hours were including any sleep if I wanted to get some).
In terms of weight, the camera gear (which I wanted to take along) and laptop
(which I needed for work) accounted for almost as much as all the camping
equipment I brought along.

Madeira is a popular destination not only for digital nomads, but also all sorts
of young and old people from other countries who live there, work remotely, or
arrived on Madeira to retire.

I found plenty of resources online how to get in touch with them. The «Digital
Nomads Madeira» Slack workspace in particular was especially helpful. Almost
every day there is an activity or event happening around the island, and you are
welcome to join. All it takes is to write a simple «Yes, I’m in!» and you’re up
for an adventure.

While looking through the offered activities I saw that someone organising a
boat ride to the neighbouring island Desertas. 8 people, one boat, a skipper,
barbecue on Desertas, spend a night there, then go back. All for ~130 Euro. The
boat was leaving exactly one week after I arrived on the island.

I didn’t even look for accommodation before I set off to Madeira. I knew I’d
spend the first week or so camping. The first thing I did when I got through
customs was to get a car, drive to a Decathlon in Funchal to grab some camping
supplies. I spent the first afternoon in the capital city of the island:
Funchal. I can highly recommend the Monte Palace garden which can be easily
reached via cable car from beach. In the late afternoon I headed to towards the
hills above Funchal to look for a suitable campground.

Having your own car for getting around the island is definitely useful. Of
course I opted for the cheapest car, I only needed space for one backpack after
all. The clerk at the car rental office recommended that I get a slightly larger
– more powerful – car. I respectfully declined. Half an hour later, on my way on
the highway from the airport to Funchal I realised why. The roads on the island
are steep. Like really steep. Even the highways.

In a week I managed to drive almost around the whole island, view its diverse
sides, and walk many gorgeous trails.

The more popular trails on the island are well marked and safe to walk. The less
popular trails are less well marked and less safe. If you are not comfortable
walking half a meter from a steep cliff to your side, without any guardrails
along the path, then you best avoid those.

I never felt in danger while walking the trails. But I had a few moments where
stepping a few centimetres more to the side could have meant the difference
between me coming home and me ending up as a pile of bones beneath one of the
steep hillsides.

Only at the very end of my stay on Madeira I was made aware that people
regularly disappear during walks alone on these trails. To the polish trail
runner who went for a run and never came back a few days before I left the
island: rest in peace.

Trails along levadas (irrigation channels or aqueducts) are the easiest, they
are essentially level without any steep inclines. They also lead mostly through
forests, which shade you from the scorching sun.

While walking the trails I noticed that trees are constantly shedding leaves. It
is not something I’m used to seeing in mainland europe, where most trees lose
leaves only in autumn. But it does make sense: the soil is so rich and the
weather is almost constant all around year that everything constantly grows, as
if there were no seasons.

Wild camping is prohibited, but there are official campgrounds strategically
placed across the whole island. They are free and the only requirement is that
you fill out an online form. It’s really not that difficult, takes about five
minutes.

I met a lot of backpackers on the trails, not a single one filled out the form.
I did, dutifully, every single time. Of course I did, I grew up in Switzerland,
and rules are to be followed. It was just a mild inconvenience, after all. 

I still don’t speak more than «thank you» in Portuguese. Most people I was
interacting with spoke really good English. And I learned pretty early on to
greet people on trails with «dobrý den» (Czech) or «bonjour» (French). Speaking
Czech was not something I was expecting when I set to travel to Madeira, but it
felt nice to speak some of my mother tongue again. Some days I felt I was
somewhere in the Czech mountains.

Not once did I encounter rain – the classical rain I know from mainland Europe –
but I got wet a few times nonetheless. The particular topology of the island and
the climate around it cause clouds to form and gather around the tall mountains
of the island, at about 900-1200 m above sea level. If you are unlucky, you’ll
find yourself in thick fog, and water starts condensing all around and on you.

The Fanal forest is located at a particular face of the island, at a particular
altitude above sea, that it often finds itself engulfed in thick clouds. When
the sun shines through the dense fog, it makes the landscape around appear
almost like a magical place.

I spent the night there, along with two lovely young ladies. They were from
Czechia, unsurprisingly.

Before it got too dark I decided to walk around the forest, trying to capture
the magic moment, with my eyes and heart equally. While standing in the middle
of a small depression I heard a stampede behind me and when I turned around I
saw cattle racing towards me. It took me a while to realise what’s going on
around me, and even longer to recover from the shock. I’m not particularly easy
to scare, but the sound of what seemed an elephant running from behind my back
towards me gave me the chills.

I was hoping that the clouds will clear up until the morning and I’ll be able to
watch a beautiful sunrise from a nearby hill. Instead I woke up with the tent
soaked. The clouds hadn’t cleared up and the chance to see the sun was nil.

After a week of camping around the island I was dirty and needed to get myself
cleaned up. The shores in and around Funchal offered a wide selection of four-
and five-star hotels. No reservation was required, the hotels were mostly empty
anyways. I got a good deal at one, they even upgraded me to a room with a pool
view. The next morning I left for Desertas.

I went to Madeira to be alone, away from work, enjoy nature once again. After
walking across the island for a week I just wanted to have two days doing
nothing. Let myself float wherever the boat would take me. I didn’t care about
who else was on the boat.

The first thing I noticed on the boat was that I’m immune to sea sickness. The
perpetual rocking of the boat didn’t affect me at all. On the way back from the
island I even went under the deck to take a nap (something the skipper strongly
advised against).

Going on that trip turned out to be one of the best decisions I did while I was
there. Not only because the sea was exceptionally calm and we got to see
dolphins, but also because of the people I met.

After getting back to the main island I still had one corner of the island to
explore: Ponta de São Lourenço. It is the easternmost point of Madeira, located
on a peninsula.

Because I was on Madeira around the summer solstice, the sun was setting and
rising quite far in the north. From where I was standing on the peninsula, the
sun set just behind Santana on the northern coast of the island, and rose just
east of Porto Santo (the neighbouring island to the north-east of Madeira).

Ponta de São Lourenço concluded my exploration of the island. On my way to Ponta
do Sol, where I was to spend the rest of my time on the island, I stopped for a
night at the Parque Ecológico do Funchal. The park seemed closed, and I couldn’t
find any information as to why. The park is high enough to be above the cloud
cover, and there was plenty of open space where I could set up camp.

Ponta do Sol is not the nicest town on the island, but it has a beach, a hotel
on the cliff with a nice view, and a public coworking space.

I had one last weekend available to me before I had to fly back to Switzerland,
and I used it to cross another item off of my bucket list: spend the night at
the top of Pico Ruivo, the highest mountain on the island. Three trails lead up
to the top. The one from Achada do Teixeira is the easiest, it takes less than
an hour on a trail with almost no incline. The trail from Pico do Areeiro is
very demanding as it forces you to cover 300 altitude meters down and then up
again. The last trail to the top from Encumeada is not so steep, but long (~11km
one way) and the trail is not that well maintained.

There is one official campground a bit below the peak. But I didn’t want walk
down in the darkness after sunset (and up again before sunrise), so I set my
sleeping bag just below the stone pylon which marks the peak, giving me a bit of
a protection from the wind. The night was exceptionally warm, but the strong
wind woke me periodically up all throughout the night. Like a subtle nudge, that
I should look up in the sky to see the stars. And indeed, every time I opened my
eyes I would watch the sky for a few minutes, before falling asleep once again.

More than once I’ve been told that I’m crazy. I’m not quite sure whether it was
the fact that I was traveling alone or the particular activities I was doing.
The three young people who came up to Pico Ruivo in the dark after sunset, just
to take a couple pictures of the night sky and then walk down again were no
exception. But sure, I’m the crazy one for leaning back and taking the time to
look at the night sky all night long and not them for traveling three hours or
more just for the opportunity to snap a few pictures and then hiking in the
pitch black night back home.
