My flight was leaving before 6 a.m. in the morning. I took the first train to
the airport but that wasn’t early enough. I missed the flight and there I was,
at 6 a.m. at the airport but no flight to board.

<Image
  size="narrow"
  blobId="9VCAXoxj1o1fU9qnRpfEmTiHrYDd73FMQ1yGeJJ8vahD"
  caption="Road to Hotel Molika in National Park Pelister."
/>

I pulled out my iPhone, searched for the next flight to Skopje and found one
that wasn’t too expensive a few hours later the same day. After a short layover
in Belgrade, I arrived at my destination in early afternoon.

<Group>
  <Image
    span={[12, 5]}
    blobId="9rSt99G12sx1ioWSKRo1fSpWtRqoQAzDVN1XffEGyYk7"
    caption="Climb out of Belgrade on a sunny autumn day."
  />
  <Image
    span={[12, 7]}
    blobId="Dnk452rDDrfCP9yo5Ut9CdxiNCs9KhpEVjsY7VdZWv46"
    caption="Skopje airport at half past two in the afternoon."
  />
</Group>

In Belgrade I saw a lone Chinese girl boarding the same flight to Skopje. She
didn't look much like a tourist, but then did I? I certainly don't consider
myself a tourist when I travel the world.

My first thought was that she is one of the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI)
employees flying into North Macedonia. China has to date invested more than one
billion US$ through its BRI into North Macedonia. The money has helped to
finance infrastructure projects, but also fuel corruption. But I digress, I was
not there to investigate China's growing influence in the Western Balkans.

<Group>
  <Image
    span={[12, 6]}
    blobId="BiuZpdHHJwPG2FXpbH4uuBH4dmQsms78NcsmqWEeK7as"
    caption="Headquarter of the Post Office of Macedonia."
  />
  <Image
    span={[12, 6]}
    blobId="5aGEyVQY645BziyJL5BhkFGPnxqkJzH5rCg5EXPwxd9v"
    caption="Green shores of Vardar River in Skopje."
  />
</Group>

Other than her I have seen almost no people from Asia, there was only that one
obvious asian tourist group in Skopje. Other foreigners I came across blended
well with the local population. Even I – a tall white boy with long blond hair –
was not seen as a foreigner. Unless I indicated that I only speak English,
people would speak to me in Macedonian.

<Image size="wide" blobId="8jmHLuaP6pmF1uQPWWLaLJ1gGVEjz598NwMpunGjQnMP" />

Weather was nice and clear as we were climbing out of Belgrade. I knew North
Macedonia had some decent mountains, but the landscape around us for the first
minutes of flight was flat. The closer we were coming to Skopje the higher the
hills were getting. Some even taller peaks were visible on the horizon to the
south-east. Was that Mount Olympus in Greece?

The airport in Skopje is small, just one runway and a few gates. Our airplane
was the only one on the tarmac at half past two in the afternoon. I felt like at
a regional airport at best.

<Group>
  <Image
    span={[12, 4]}
    blobId="9oSQeLrSdcx4tArksdmeTvjdrfGUpnhaFedvdihPMaJk"
    caption="One of many homeless children walking throuh Old Bazaar in Skopje."
  />
  <Image span={[12, 4]} blobId="EQ2b1jnHbyg4LHcRJhaZn4AED6FCkgm6Lh1RTgUg33Ya" />
  <Image span={[12, 4]} blobId="E54RQNAA3YzaY6Qx2Jei1wShZsbZ9aD9kpWgQ6uQngBs" />
</Group>

Already in Belgrade I subconsciously noticed labels written in Cyrillic script.
But only in Skopje when waiting at the immigration queue I realised that I
should practice reading that script once again. It’s been a while since I last
was in a country that uses that script, and only a few characters remained in my
memory.

During the ride into the city center the taxi driver complained about cars being
parked on the side of the road, where they shouldn’t. Apparently when there is a
two lane road the right lane is often used as parking space. After I picked up
my own car I quickly learned to prefer driving in the left lane on such roads. I
learned that, and also that orange lights at intersections mean «accelerate, and
you might make it before the lights turn red».

<Group>
  <Image
    span={[12, 6]}
    blobId="28yUADT9LHvXfo38wDXtCGhijwTJ4fpbyFv6FVJiJdfo"
    caption="Bus stop below Skpoje Fortrest. Double-decker busses are in service since 2011."
  />
  <Image span={[12, 6]} blobId="DaYmeAcXwP7qaQ8hFpSmx2uErFnp27nfBR1aDLZ98MMD" />
</Group>

In general though, I felt safe driving in North Macedonia. Most people drove
under the posted speed limit, like if they weren’t in any rush to be anywhere.
This made driving a pleasant experience.

Skopje city center is dominated by a large square and big statues all around. A
stone bridge crosses the Vardar river, the Old Bazaar is a bit further on the
other side. Skopje Fortress does not offer anything interesting, other than a
slightly elevated view onto the city center.

<Image blobId="E6vCj3Poey6bWPMrXv9QTZB8QKdxFtMxjvSWygooXxKd" />

Taking the cable car up to the Millennium Cross is a better way to get a view on
the whole city. The hill on which it stands raises 700 meters above the city,
during good weather you can even seen the mountains on the other side of the
valley.

My first venture out of the city was to Canyon Matka, about half hour by taxi to
the west of Skopje. It was Thursday, I left early morning and so was greeted by
nobody but a few stray dogs.

<Image size="wide" blobId="3ZdyR14BxTr6DbcHosiSeK2iLNJaKeVb7WLWXdnEYTNH" />

I saw a lot of stray dogs, in all parts of the country. It was difficult for me
to restrain myself and not take one home. Especially one of the cute just weeks
old puppies in Mavrovo.

Upstream in the canyon is a famous cave – the Vrelo Cave. There are two options
how to get to it: take a boat or rent a kayak and paddle there at your own pace.
I took the boat. The cave is not extraordinary though, I can't recommend it on
its own, unless you have money and time to spare. More rewarding than the cave
is a walk along the canyon on foot. You can also climb the steep sides of the
canyon to a ruin of an orthodox church or monastery to enjoy an elevated view on
the canyon and surrounding National Park called Jesen.

<Group>
  <Image
    span={[12, 4]}
    blobId="2yv2f3CgFn1D5V26bz1x94TKL453ywnARwHcj5YZGeJa"
    caption="Dam at the head of Canyon Matka."
  />
  <Image
    span={[12, 8]}
    blobId="5j8WXJUnRxb7kHX3JHaHm5xFaYMG195J3Z5V3VAUuhM1"
    caption="People who take the kayak to the Vrelo Cave can disembark on this floating platform."
  />
</Group>

After a short rest at a cafe I started walking back down. I was in no rush and
was looking for a place to have lunch at. A taxi driver noticed me and offered
me a ride down. He even offered to wait for me while I have lunch and take me
back whenever I was ready. Even though I repeatedly denied, he was following me
in his car with the hope that I change my mind.

Unfortunately for him, I noticed a trail map that showed a not too long hiking
trail back to the city. Unfortunately for me, I only checked the distance and
time, but did not realise that I did not have any water with me, nor that I’d
arrive after sunset at the Millennium Cross and the cable car down to the city
didn’t operate at that time anymore.

In hindsight, I trusted the information in Google Maps a bit too much.

<Group>
  <Image
    span={[12, 8]}
    blobId="CiPhkMqkdrnvDPZnLaJwKLqVZQiDLpVvLe9xRLqqP5hr"
    caption="Cottage in Canyon Matka, reachable only by boat."
  />
  <Image
    span={[12, 4]}
    blobId="Bozw2sUe5o3y9FRaW9zZhjahTjk1vJCTKeEZ39WMmu3p"
    caption="Damaged railing at the trail along Canyon Matka."
  />
</Group>

The taxi driver tried very hard to convince me not to walk back, but not because
of any of the previously mentioned reasons. He was telling me about wolves and
bears in the hills and that I shouldn’t be walking alone. I dismissed his
warnings as I didn’t believe him.

Throughout my stay in North Macedonia I received different responses from locals
to my questions about bears. No there aren’t any, yes there are but they’ll run
away, yes there are and they’ll eat you alive.

During that first hike I was prepared for a bear behind every corner, every
sound that was coming from the bushes spiked my adrenaline level.

<Group>
  <Image span={[12, 7]} blobId="4AZaTxoNno6odPwpZEHjxVKG4ZVJB8zyAaejB2MF7Xs8" />
  <Image span={[12, 5]} blobId="3SdtMia7cnJBY7PvwnJmGKSJu8rjWyvGuXcMLUkPvLSu" />
</Group>

Nothing happened. I'm still alive.

I took the fact that I survived the first hike as a sign of the absence of
dangerous animals. From then on my mind was more relaxed on my future hikes and
was able to enjoy them much more.

After two days in Skopje I picked up a car and drove to the west, towards
Tetovo. Highways were of decent quality, interrupted only be toll stations. It
cost 40 to 60 denars to pass each, payable preferably in cash.

<Image size="full" blobId="BEK743dErXaoPgSqzygLVin93ECYrfv2rnndAHi5fxwX" caption="Panorama of Popova Shapka." />

My goal that day was Titov Vrv, a mountain with an iconic watch tower at the
top. I drove to Popova Shapka and continued from there on foot. The small winter
resort still hadn’t seen a snowflake that winter season, so the trail was dry,
as was the weather.

On my way up I met a group of young people who were heading in the same
direction. They were in no rush as they had planned to spend the night in the
watch tower and head back down the next day.

One of them was carrying a large axe. My first thought was for splitting fire
wood. But we were above the tree line and they didn't carry any fire wood with
them. He was visibly exhausted from carrying the axe and large backpack and so I
asked why they put in all the effort to carry this clearly useless tool with
them. Their answer: for protection from bears.

<Image size="wide" blobId="7QkTod8yDVq9DQHVrfhS96tXPevoAXjhTCsAyXhhnD1n" />

I didn't have enough time to go all the way to Titov Vrv and back, and had to
turn back before reaching the top.

It was my first day with a car, I wasn’t used yet to the local driving style and
didn’t want to drive after sunset. The same evening I had to get to the very
southern part of Mavrovo Lake in the heart of Mavrovo National Park where I had
an apartment for a few days.

<Image
  size="narrow"
  blobId="BgL8xaDaep9f9xr96R52rnybaetz5JSnyQYiLbkeX8e5"
  caption="Sunrise in Mavrovo National Park."
/>

October is the time in between the summer and winter season in Mavrovo. I saw
less than a dozen tourists, most hotels were closed, empty, or renovating in
preparation for the upcoming winter season. It was still warm during the day,
but once the sun has set I had to put on layers to keep warm. And the sun set at
4 p.m. already, days were getting shorter.

<Image
  size="wide"
  blobId="5CXQLgiaiRW78dLMdXEKjUXmiqrwJVyAgQdLRhYXgyvj"
  caption="In late autumn the hills around Mavrovo Lake block the sunlight already early in the afternoon."
/>

The highest peak of North Macedonia – Mount Korab – is located inside the
Mavrovo National Park. One early morning I set out to conquer it.

The last stretch of the road to the trail head is 13 km, but takes 45 minutes to
drive due to the bad road condition. On the way I had to pass a border police
checkpoint, as the same road continues into Albania in the west.

<Group>
  <Image
    span={[12, 8]}
    blobId="5pihkAfsRQrzZJqXptp9JaCatmH3NKDfNewYtvQ4ELLZ"
    caption="Trails in North Macedonia are indicated with red/white marks."
  />
  <Image
    span={[12, 4]}
    blobId="HFwHmPvAv5BDV9yhX9PSLoVQHm36ENhCKPoeXZnwz3QE"
    caption="Mount Korab – the highest peak of North Macedonia."
  />
</Group>

I thought I’d be alone that day. The trail head is hours from the closest major
city, and while the weather was nice and warm during the day, the days were
short and nights cold that it didn’t leave enough time for a leisurely hike. I
definitely didn’t want to stay out after sunset.

While I was the first to set off on the trail, about half way up the mountain
four trail runners passed me. Those were the only other people I met that day.

<Image
  size="narrow"
  blobId="8T5Xc8AYcWk7VcCPSZmScwZiXBjgrWZdTBMqd7w8x7dv"
  caption="Only few leaves remain hanging on trees, most have fallen and cover the entire forest floor with a uniform yellow blanket."
/>

The last stretch of the trail to Mount Korab follows the border between North
Macedonia and Albania. The relations between the two countries are relatively
friendly so that I didn’t have to worry about stepping on land mines. There are
countries I’ve been to where the danger of stepping on land mines near borders
is a real, but not in that region of North Macedonia.

I climbed two more mountains in Mavrovo National Park. The last one was Velivar,
like Mount Korab also on the border with Albania.

<Group>
  <Image
    span={[12, 8]}
    blobId="7stvzyGoeoYKnSZ7oWv2kadJpPNBQJS7mtSRqDkXfMdC"
    caption="Mount Velivar on the border between North Macedonia and Albania."
  />
  <Image span={[12, 4]} blobId="2qkaA5muD6bYLdHt1AMLkTNX7hLSodAF4iXiFQK18tXP" />
</Group>

I was not alone roaming the withered mountain slopes that day. On my way down I
met two older gentlemen. They were taking a break by a natural spring and
invited me to join them.

My knowledge of east European languages was not quite enough to have a fluent
conversation with them. North Macedonia has their own language, closely related
to the language spoken in Bulgaria. Neither of which I've heard nor spoken
before.

<Image blobId="HSbq4B7SmJtXYKVdHJUvy3ZsLgm8ycs5qJFr39xQBekt" />

Many people have family and relatives studying and working in other countries.
Germany, Austria, or Switzerland are very popular. German, next to English, was
therefore a useful foreign language to know.

According to the two gentlemen, spring is the best time of year to visit the
mountains of North Macedonia. During spring, flowers are blooming and the
mountain slopes shine in all imaginable colors. In autumn though, most
vegetation was somewhere between light yellow and dark brown. Only some trees
were radiating a bright red color, as they were shedding their leaves.

<Group>
  <Image span={[12, 4]} blobId="75qbjb3aYgVtENp3ejfAg9E8YzygSZ6dFkLhNHEsLC6h" />
  <Image span={[12, 8]} blobId="3JiGqzFcuwgpivgajW6UQUYt3HshfNpSBw9W3XcdRZJs" caption="Lone fisher on Lake Debar." />
</Group>

I was almost back down at my car, a few hundred meters above Rostushe, when I
walked through a clearing in the forest that had a fountain and a fireplace. I
had passed that place on my way up and didn’t think much of it.

It was a place similar to so many that I had seen before and after. A fireplace,
water source, bench and table, some trash littered around. Often in remote
locations only reachable on foot. Clearly an outdoor picnic place that sees
regular use during the summer days.

It was just after noon and a group of women were cooking something over an open
fire. I didn’t really have much time to spare – it was a regular weekday and I
had to work – but they offered me food and I couldn’t resist.

<Image
  blobId="H8RXGJzzXTR56niJwQMDT5GzAQ4zvuTy4JH32xpQAACp"
  caption="This dish they were preparing is called mekitsa, a deep fried dough served with jam, honey, or cheese."
/>

Two young boys were with them, one of whom was on school break visiting his
family. He was studying in Germany so his German was decent. We talked about
life in the village, his family, North Macedonian culture and much more.

I asked him why they were cooking so far from home. The place was a few hundred
meters above the village and they had to carry all their cooking utensils and
ingredients up there. His answer was simple and straightforward: it was nice
weather so why not? They get to spend the day outside, in nature, with family
and friends.

<Image size="full" blobId="5G2vCncgnuT76d8S3W9e8nyGsm66v8MtUN4UATWrFvov" caption="Ohrid, North Macedonia." />

Out of all the cities I visited in North Macedonia, I enjoyed Ohrid the most.
Maybe I was just lucky that it was sunny and warm during my couple days there.
So warm in fact that I was walking in shorts on the shores of the lake, even got
a sunburn. In early November.

I knew that Ohrid was a popular tourist destination during summer. And it was
exactly what I had expected based on that. Clean, welcoming, with lots of food
and shopping options.

<Group>
  <Image span={[12, 4]} blobId="8JECKee9HWk9Xu9R5TzW1fnr5Sg2PNt997j5KkzroApZ" />
  <Image span={[12, 4]} blobId="7BQvnMFj3SM4K3vnwyuGmjDoQdjUqBozk6H4SoJ1tTyJ" />
  <Image span={[12, 4]} blobId="A3z5zr25TspYSftEp9HS3Ergh3iG2gSpPwPLrUWHirsf" />
  <Image span={[12, 3]} blobId="2fBWFSFaE4uuvTBvLU4fLz9nz5bSZprtz31szGvCp3ge" />
  <Image span={[12, 6]} blobId="ByA2Jt9Vj8HHNoc3yLQJ3YG4rU9sq3aZMWiDoLNTJ45h" />
  <Image span={[12, 3]} blobId="DUJ89JKdiwvrr3RpZStdxtGWrtaHW2Ew5vXPKXw1dznD" />
</Group>

I wouldn’t want to be there, in Ohrid, at the hight of the tourist season. But
autumn provided a nice balance between still warm weather and lack of tourism
rush.

From Ohrid I only did a few trips into the nearby Galičica National Park, but
otherwise used my time there to slow down and enjoy the break.

<Group>
  <Image
    span={[12, 8]}
    blobId="2GijHpyjGQbyUkMwhaFoboiWMepk3AgNuQP6u3eb2oiK"
    caption="The Bay of Bones. Reconstructed village of stilt houses displaying Bronze & Iron Age items recovered from Lake Ohrid."
  />
  <Image span={[12, 4]} blobId="GbHQ6Pic97HcsExzsyjAYmwa22PrJeRkaWBiT2FNRumf" />
</Group>

Bitola was the last city I had on my itinerary. More than the city itself I
wanted to visit the nearby National Park Pelister.

My first impressions of Bitola were disappointing. It was dark when I arrived in
the city but it still felt dirty and chaotic. Could've also been the gloomy
atmosphere, it was overcast and cold. A stark contrast to what I had experienced
a day earlier in Ohrid.

<Group>
  <Image span={[12, 6]} blobId="8FVterQjswtBKdbmzZP1fwUGUQjbYPtwXCvjBAXUBM9t" />
  <Image span={[12, 3]} blobId="DDCTWQQrriLLQ6bPpgw4Y1NGJJgG8VAqu342Prv8GM8p" />
  <Image span={[12, 3]} blobId="7EibdSLs5gfwrbDdik2TNaSn42HvLf5FzFt4dZmbqoD4" />
</Group>

The day I arrived in North Macedonia I got a local SIM card with 20 GB data for
about 400 denars. That seemed enough for the amount of work I was planning to do
during my time in the country. Signal strength and speed was good even in remote
locations.

In two weeks I used up ~15 GB, and that included many times when I was working
on my laptop tethered to the phone. Then in Bitola I had two meetings where the
other participants turned on their video and within an hour the rest of my data
allowance was used up.

<Image
  blobId="4h9RCBcFEtekBHiqZtVv7gLrDhQFUsqjExLhZNtsDA8a"
  caption="Ruins of Heraclea Lyncestis, an ancient Greek city, located 2 km south of Bitola."
/>

My original plan in Bitola was to climb Baba Mountain but I almost decided not
to, discouraged by the bad weather.

On Thursday my only item on my schedule was a meeting at 5 p.m. Despite the grim
outlook I decided to get up early in the morning and drive up to the trail head
near Hotel Molika. As I was turning the last corners before arriving at the
hotel parking, I punched through the low clouds and was greeted by a clear blue
sky. My mindset instantly changed and I was happy to spend the day in the
mountains once again.

<Group>
  <Image
    span={[12, 8]}
    blobId="96zj4GyQAQYkWow3LHzXXkdtXphTWeAj2BkqY62u1SUB"
    caption="Baba Mountain, third highest mountain in North Macedonia."
  />
  <Image span={[12, 4]} blobId="FrHCa18tuSmsK771QMwYdDaU93cXZ9ubqp7Aqvnbzhrf" />
  <Image blobId="6QRu3rohVphEAavwd1GLTzyAsucQPzruLKJNqc8NeLWQ" />
</Group>

As I had done so many times, I spent my time between roughly 5 a.m. and 2 p.m.
outside, in the mountains. That was the time when the sun was out and nobody
from the office needed me urgently. I would then either go back down to the town
to find a cafe to work from or drive to the next city.

The same evening I had to get back to Skopje, which was a three hour drive away,
but still had that one meeting in late afternoon. I stopped in Prilep with the
hope of finding a quiet place.

<Image blobId="HSqnGX6s2taPBPvJWEfjgYjJQdH9FP9tcRSZPvi4odwp" caption="Town Square Metodija Andonov Chento in Prilep." />

None of the cafes and restaurants I saw in North Macedonia were entirely
smoke-free. Nor could I ever find any that were quiet. Finding a place where I
could join a meeting from was therefore impossible. I picked my best option out
of those that were available, luckily I didn't have to talk that much so the
other participants didn't notice the noise around me as much.

I arrived in Skopje late in the night. After close to three weeks I was used to
driving at night. I still didn’t like it though. The lack of road markings made
driving at night a strenuous affair.

<Image
  size="narrow"
  blobId="HFsTd7JUwhng4ZobRUc62sJLc2jh6CjY3Pkwo7AYHmbn"
  caption="I was one of only three guests at the Restaurant Kajche in Ohrid on that late autumn evening."
/>

One backpack and one tiny duffle bag was all that I had with me for the three
weeks. And not even that I was able to fill up, initially. I had some spare
space so I took my climbing shoes with me.

Climbing shoes because I knew there was a boulder bar in Skopje. I went there in
the first week once, and again just before leaving the country to meet the
friends who I made during my first visit.

My flight back to Zurich was departing after noon, and I had a car so there was
little chance that I’d be late.

I wasn’t.

<Image
  size="wide"
  blobId="9Qu6N2HwV3tNA2Ew9b8gjLqMn7BQPfcANuwgd3QcCqYY"
  caption="Sunrise on Medenica in the heart of the Mavrovo National Park."
/>

While boarding the plane I overheard the flight attendant talking to the captain
about how the coffee machine and other appliances in the kitchen don’t work. I
couldn’t resist to ask about the state of engines and breaks. The captain
reassured me that they are most certainly in working order, and seemed concerned
about my apparent fear of flying.

<Image
  blobId="2R2U9fTixcDdabmFrzn8M9SZSZjGdWR2q4UjqGwRwYK5"
  caption="Sun rays punching through thick clouds above Lake Kozjak on my last day in North Macedonia."
/>

I appreciate how he was concerned about the psychological well-being of his
passengers, but flying is not what I fear.
