import { importImage } from "../../image.macro";

The look on the clerk’s face at the main branch of UBS in the middle of Zurich
when I asked her if I could buy Armenian dram was priceless. «No dear, that
currency isn’t even traded in Switzerland» she replied. I bought Euros instead.

<Image
  size="wide"
  blobId="7VJFevurFCVw9ooeWUi67qcWcRwcfZoD7UJMT18NNvCC"
  caption="A woman in red looking down the Cascade Complex."
/>

After getting out of the airport in Yerevan, I was immediately surrounded by a
gang of taxi drivers. A better option would’ve been to order a taxi through the
Yandex app. But I didn’t have internet at that time yet, and wanted to get to
the hostel as soon as possible. It was 4 a.m. local time, combined with the time
difference to central Europe, it meant I didn’t get much sleep that night.

We weren’t driving for long before we almost hit a stray dog wandering through
the middle of the road. The whole ride I attentively watched how the taxi driver
and other cars behave. It was a valuable lesson as I had planned to rent a car
and drive through the country on my own. The road markings were either
non-existent, washed out, or covered in dust, drivers would drive wherever they
pleased. Thankfully that behaviour was not foreign to me anymore, and I knew I’d
be able to cope with it.

<Group>
  <Image
    span={[12, 7]}
    aspectRatio={5 / 4}
    blobId="23WtjPSw8C1bPr688Zax4uv6iFHQTf8LmDQJsMxTHBpa"
    caption="Swan Lake in the center of Yerevan."
  />{" "}
  <Image
    span={[12, 5]}
    aspectRatio={5 / 4}
    blobId="HdUG8AwEaZwzUfnphfyTdAnVZWZCy7VLbGMKqtpL7HM6"
    caption="The Cascade Complex from below."
  />
</Group>

On first sight, the country didn’t seem as poor as I had expected. The streets
were decently clean, the buildings not crumbling, most cars in reasonable shape.
But I was in the capital, home of 35% of Armenias population, the economic
center of the country. That skews everything.

<Group>
  <Image span={[12, 5]} aspectRatio={5 / 3} blobId="B8mz3D8dQFEaBsBE3XYmyFWRoqaVbouj5Npbvjjwug9p" />
  <Image span={[12, 7]} aspectRatio={5 / 3} blobId="GHtKBQYMgFyYKe34mJb175sGnZ5x6kY8fHqVHz9NVknE" />
  <Image
    span={[12]}
    aspectRatio={8 / 4}
    blobId="H6nCK1TSWJshdugzaqL4RP9XhEYrfDNQrHE8ikFAxsC6"
    caption="Dalan Art Gallery and Cafe."
  />
</Group>

First thing I did after unpacking in the hostel was to get a SIM card. After
that, walk through the city to get my bearings. The city centre isn’t big, takes
only about half hour to cross on foot.

In early morning hours the city was quiet except for a few drunken people
torkling through the streets. Only after about 10 a.m. the city slowly began to
come alive and stayed so well into the night. Even toddlers were running around
the parks long time after the sun had set.

<Group>
  <Image
    span={[12, 3]}
    aspectRatio={5 / 5}
    blobId="CmtzRPa7ioQrdMkp62rHKBJqrSrqHQhz7fAvR2Sy99nB"
    caption="Flower vendors were on every corner, staffed even in the middle of the night."
  />
  <Image span={[12, 5]} aspectRatio={5 / 4} blobId="6jFPFqsc4yGzTt4WgcKJPpYKxhHxsJSvDTjpZbqncCFC" />
  <Image span={[12, 4]} aspectRatio={5 / 5} blobId="EAKhb37iVrLkGco3oW2kiaaaTDUWSShZRPt5PuNqfyBQ" />
  <Image span={[12, 5]} aspectRatio={5 / 5} blobId="9yNPXTQ5sZzLX2X3FSqHFNxzGpwSy5chpKUfWQaCHqtT" />
  <Image span={[12, 7]} aspectRatio={5 / 3} blobId="B4cPNKZ5xjavzL4ZNBGsc95PFJNhuJfrCJRbe4KUwDCR" />
</Group>

Temperatures during the day would sometimes raise to uncomfortable levels, and
that made me seek one of the many cafes. They are all nicely decorated and
invite you to sit down, take a break, grab a snack, pull out your laptop and
work for a bit while you enjoy the shade from the scorching sun.

The cafes in Yerevan are well prepared for digital nomads. Most tables have at a
socket nearby and WiFi is plenty fast. The amount of young people I saw working
from cafes was astounding. Who needs a coworking space if you can sit outside,
in a nice cafe? Maybe in the dead of winter when temperatures drop to negative
degrees celsius. In September though, it was still comfortably warm.

<Image
  size="full"
  blobId="9HWfM1TFGkgTbLG2phYVMFxmGqueMB1RiCnWaedTqx8h"
  caption="Tsitsernakaberd Armenian Genocide Memorial Complex in Yerevan."
/>

Outside of Yerevan cafes were few and far between. I had to get creative and
work from communal benches, next to babushkas watching over my shoulders, on
children’s playgrounds, or gas stations. My job doesn't require me to sit in
front of a computer all day, so when attending meetings I would often not even
use my laptop, let alone sit in one place. I’d dial in from my phone and stroll
through cities or forests.

I was not even 24 hours in Yerevan before I thought to myself: this is a really
nice city, I could very well imagine living here. But something didn’t add up.
The average monthly wage is about 200’000 dram (420 USD). And yet the prices in
Yerevan were high enough that it was hard for me to imagine living on that wage.
So I wondered what life would look outside the capital. I would soon find out,
because for the rest of my stay in Armenia I had a car.

<Group>
  <Image
    span={[12, 8]}
    aspectRatio={5 / 3}
    blobId="9en8meiBMYn5zpowUkBRiiYD9r88DbGkQL9agajShipC"
    caption="Letters made of stone at the Armenian Alphabet Monument."
  />
  <Image span={[12, 4]} aspectRatio={3 / 5} blobId="FfyXrCrjUpvsExrUcS28jJMGrv42ednJKv9vu1Q7RRd8" />
  <Image
    span={[12]}
    aspectRatio={5 / 3}
    blobId="5C3T7wrCceAoRMBVJkS9BnyRBZXXdZje8dAfUzvHa8MH"
    caption="Looking down the Kasakh gorge from Saghmosavank monastery"
  />
</Group>

Only three nights I had pre-booked, at the lovely [Debed Co-living & Workation
House](https://debed.life/). Other than that, I was free to stay wherever I
wanted. My rough plan was to cover the country clockwise. Starting in Yerevan,
first night below the Mount Aragats peaks, then north to Lake Sevan, Dilijan,
Vanadzor, Dsegh, then around Lake Sevan, down to Kapan, all the way to Meghri on
the Armenia-Iran border, then back towards the north-west through Areni,
Artashat, Garni before heading back to Yerevan. In the end I had two extra days
left so I extended my round trip to Gyumri, the second largest city in Armenia,
located in the west of the country.

<Image
  size="wide"
  blobId="EzejrsmRPzCWbW17aBbVu9vu3AcrecU4Q2WbQ7La9pZv"
  caption="The orange outline marks Armenia's border. Blue the path I drove by car, about 2200 km in total."
/>

As soon as I drove out of the city, I immediately noticed a huge amount of
litter, unlike anything I’ve seen before. Even in secluded locations, far away
from civilization I found trash. And I don’t mean trash that has been blown
there by wind (such as various pieces of light plastic), I mean trash that
people have thrown away there at the very spot. A triple-A battery discarded on
the slopes of Mount Aragats, miles away from the nearest village, or an
aluminium can hundreds of meters off of the trail through the Angels Canyon.
Trash bins in the middle of cities were overflowing, the trash scattered for
meters in all directions around them. It was like of people didn’t care at all,
were not even bothered by it.

<Group>
  <Image span={[12, 5]} aspectRatio={5 / 3} blobId="Am3uzA2myQwusip9jfbysZUU8a4zoe4GWMSibQV4zDam" />
  <Image
    span={[12, 7]}
    aspectRatio={3 / 2}
    blobId="FV7ujL7poF2SXYFi181ApSzX8suQpJ8PEqMr3QJghQfJ"
    caption="Battery thrown away below the peaks of Mount Aragats."
  />
  <Image
    span={[12, 8]}
    aspectRatio={5 / 3}
    blobId="AsVM6tLJfgRbQSoLMEqWR1XEUr36pQUaST9qvSppzV5V"
    caption="Southern shore of Lake Sevan."
  />
  <Image
    span={[12, 4]}
    aspectRatio={22 / 3}
    blobId="4Sz1V4eg6rsUnRJmrFavX23bnBt7WWzVmqs74nwqzjor"
    caption="Trash dump behind Madina."
  />
  <Image
    span={[12]}
    aspectRatio={3 / 2}
    blobId="3iHZPjiCGYFawAadgpQ67AL2LsfpK1ShaDTbhAE51hgg"
    caption="Overflowing trash bins at Sisian Park, Sisian."
  />
</Group>

The day I picked up my car, I slowly made my way towards Lake Kari, which is the
starting point for ascending Mount Aragats. I stopped at the Hovhannavank and
Saghmosavan monasteries, as well as the Armenian Alphabet Monument along the
way.

A few hundred meters on a small hill above the Armenian Alphabet Monument I saw
a huge iron cross. Wondering what it is, I started walking towards it. On my way
I met a lone shepherd. As I pointed towards the cross he called off the dogs
that were guarding his sheep.

On my way back I met the shepherd once again and tried to converse. Armenian is
the official language of the people, but a large fraction also speaks Russian.
Unfortunately I still don’t, so hand gestures and Google Translate had to
suffice. This much I understood: he was from the village about 5km from where we
were standing (explains the horse I had seen earlier), and asked whether I had
visited all the monasteries along the Kasakh gorge (Christianity plays an
important role in the Armenian culture), which I answered with да. To his
question where I was staying I had to look up the Russian word for tent –
палатка.

<Group>
  <Image span={[12]} aspectRatio={6 / 3} blobId="B9GviFaaSRfX4NTXhHbhGKiz2jF3Vc1KAyNSQRzbqKZP" />
  <Image span={[12, 7]} aspectRatio={5 / 3} blobId="74EwhQQ3s234BUaNJhgaJsTancLXkLhvR8YXiRGyTrck" />
  <Image
    span={[12, 5]}
    aspectRatio={3 / 3}
    blobId="EegnqFyBauqNo1m3D758Ts9LRPJpxb27VPsi387Ym5BU"
    caption="Road towards Lake Kari."
  />
  <Image span={[12, 12]} aspectRatio={9 / 4} blobId="4mVWqsEcr1qTnKP1M4gGs6p3Uy8xmuWz5TmnrBnE5Cbm" />
</Group>

All roads in Armenia, even major highways, can be anything between «the asphalt
is still steaming hot» to «has potholes larger that the radius of a car tire». I
was glad I had a SUV, as I can’t imagine driving a compact car on such roads.
Though evidently it is possible. I saw lots of second-hand Mercedes. And Ladas
of all ages. The newer models such as Niva seemed very popular and well suited
for the type of roads I was seeing.

I arrived at Lake Kari at around 5 p.m. After packing my backpack I started
hiking towards the eastern peak of Mount Aragats. It’s the lowest and most
accessible of the four peaks. The trail to it is easy, first half is through
meadows with just a gentle incline, the second part over rocky terrain. Even
though it is not marked, it’s well treaded and thus easy to follow. The hike to
the top and back can be made comfortably as a day trip from Yerevan.

<Group>
  <Image span={[12, 5]} aspectRatio={5 / 3} blobId="CKDTXJH1ZiaHcmtgkipLtyvLpFcVCcS82MbjG5JbMcnM" />
  <Image
    span={[12, 7]}
    aspectRatio={5 / 4}
    blobId="4fdwcqv2GZsArFyVYZZVH4AVBks2QzrADefZ5f9dWhS1"
    caption="Western peak of Mount Aragats."
  />
  <Image span={[12]} aspectRatio={4 / 2} blobId="9D4whmPrgjDxFGZo8rR27KXF9PTfnizszoWxBGEGcaPL" />
  <Image span={[12, 7]} aspectRatio={5 / 3} blobId="9D1vZfgmNGYP6JQihXF4KmFeo4Rjzgm6cRpCdVqHc9UA" />
  <Image span={[12, 5]} aspectRatio={5 / 5} blobId="AsLbJqFsRpYBcxha2JcGf23wgsxe1YjMUFax2MWFV3df" />
  <Image span={[12, 4]} aspectRatio={5 / 3} blobId="BTkVTbZBfuZP7hZVAADuqv7XBSMcho5bSpd4xvZPa5VK" />
  <Image span={[12, 8]} aspectRatio={5 / 3} blobId="CrH4KR8yT5KqwT6Gf4ue6r7irT4nZdQ1p4LvMHgrWg4R" />
</Group>

About half way through my ascend dusk started to set. The next morning I first
climbed the eastern peak, where I arrived at half past seven. My next goal was
the northern peak. The trail to it is neither marked nor visible in the
landscape. It traverses the crater between the peaks which has sections full of
huge boulders where it’s impossible to leave lasting footprints. Adding to that,
not many people ascend the northern peak as it’s difficult to do in one day and
requires camping on the mountain. I was glad for my smartphone, GPS, and offline
maps to show me the way. But those tools aren’t strictly required. Unless clouds
are low enough to cover the view across the crater, you should be able to make
out a path towards the peak without any help. At half past 11 I was standing at
the top.

For the way back I had two options: go back the same way I came, or take another
route. I chose the second. While I’m glad to have made that choice, it meant
descending and ascending hundreds of additional meters. It was more than I had
bargained for, but I was rewarded with beautiful views of an untouched
landscape.

<Group>
  <Image
    span={[12, 6]}
    aspectRatio={5 / 4}
    blobId="J9vUHMuGeUQSPCiLuQXcUvHGhymU9xLzEA7kkvrCpMXR"
    caption="Trail to the southrn peak of Mount Aragats."
  />
  <Image span={[12, 6]} aspectRatio={5 / 4} blobId="BphpgYXTznJCLpKx79Y3rvjsgKku6hjAB8derpswzazn" />
</Group>

It was already 6pm when I got back to my car, and I still had to get to my
planned to camp that night at the foot of Gutansar. It was already dark when I
finally got there. Driving at night was not too bad, I never felt in real
danger. It was grueling though. There are no street lights, and few cars have
working head- and taillights. Fewer still turn them on.

The next morning just after sunrise I hiked to the top of Gutansar. It peaks
only at around 200m above the surrounding terrain, but offers a nice view in all
directions. On a clear day you can see Yerevan and Mount Ararat behind it. The
day I was there haze had covered most of the Aras Valley and Mount Ararat was
barely discernible.

<Group>
  <Image
    span={[12, 6]}
    aspectRatio={5 / 4}
    blobId="Hxz3ZZXsBs5BoavPgcJt3bBaiWSzRu6kqPT2g3QVnzq5"
    caption="Lake Kari."
  />
  <Image
    span={[12, 6]}
    aspectRatio={5 / 4}
    blobId="DaP5PEEWEQL2DeFZcqUj4YfaAiYWvodXkmrQDYLK581j"
    caption="Fields around Gutansar."
  />
</Group>

Lake Sevan is the largest lake in Armenia and one of the largest freshwater,
high-altitude lakes in Eurasia. It was Saturday, and warm enough to swim in the
lake, but only a few families came to the lake and were having a picnic.

My first stop at the lake was at what looked on Google Maps as a nice, secluded
beach. It wasn’t nice, it was covered in litter. Shortly after I arrived two
young boys on horses and their herd of cattle joined me. I offered them some
Toblerone I brought from Switzerland. They accepted without saying much. A few
minutes later I spotted the packaging of the Toblerone in between the other bits
of litter. That left me speechless, and reluctant to offer any more of the
chocolate to anyone. I didn't want to be responsible for introducing even more
trash into the nature as there already was.

<Group>
  <Image span={[12, 4]} aspectRatio={5 / 4} blobId="4vcuShrpqonerohyfKfHmxJqCCFQf3UgrdiJbrcQGwj9" />
  <Image
    span={[12, 8]}
    aspectRatio={8 / 4}
    blobId="6rMdSePqQb9sSM7Gb3u9Qkth7yqbQKttRRZDoQ5snr7e"
    caption="Sunrise at Lake Sevan."
  />
  <Image span={[12, 8]} aspectRatio={8 / 4} blobId="6bMFbSq2Bfxmqeh7id5sGJVNbTyBpPobrMVqX9vNStsb" />
  <Image span={[12, 4]} aspectRatio={5 / 4} blobId="2ir1dA7MxXascuMNzzJXERRn1VLSU1BCBz7f1dktKL4R" />
</Group>

Just east of Sevan (the village) on the shores of Sevan (the lake) are what
looks like private beaches. Most have shelters, containers repurposed as houses,
makeshift playgrounds, fire pits etc. During summer these places function as
beach bars. I was hoping they’d still be open, but in September they were all
abandoned. The beaches were still decent enough that I decided to pitch my tent
on one of them.

<Group>
  <Image span={[12, 7]} aspectRatio={6 / 4} blobId="51jz8VfKwmBDdeSUQKHaAV4peoHzkNk3ooCJvQxNLqy3" />
  <Image span={[12, 5]} aspectRatio={6 / 4} blobId="464NZv47CXiaH1usKy56TL137UT9UMDes8ne4cCTacdo" />
  <Image span={[12]} aspectRatio={8 / 4} blobId="5VsYsrirPYcv9hTtsDwmETw9pRAFQqkCCjqvzBzUaL2v" />
  <Image span={[12, 5]} aspectRatio={5 / 4} blobId="5p17RNuF13JFLjzbRPBYwPBgpYLh9Faqg8DbWyPHGwW1" />
  <Image span={[12, 7]} aspectRatio={5 / 4} blobId="2pzfCJNa74QZfZAkPNdaaHXz5Di5sbretbGRMF1TyzuB" />
</Group>

Roadside vendors were plentiful, selling local produce. Fruits, vegetables, wine
in regions that grow grapes. But there was one particular item that I often saw
being sold which did not make sense to me at first: firewood.

Soon I realized why. Scattered all across the country - even in almost
unreachable places - are privately build picnic sites. The simpler ones consist
of two stone slabs, one as table the other one to sit on, and a fire pit. Most
have a freshwater spring nearby. Many have a roof above the table. Because
Christianity plays a big role in the Armenian culture, there is often a stone
cross or some other Christian symbol next to it. Some are built in honor to a
relative or friend, and the stone acts more as a tombstone.

People use any occasion as reason to pack some vegetables, meat, lavash, and of
course vodka, drive to one of these places and have a good time. Neither time of
day nor day of week matters. Monday 2pm or Sunday after dusk, any time.

And that’s why they need firewood.

<Image size="full" blobId="HmjvM7Jt8L6Gx1r1LXyoJpSvZGpz6hosM3mEy5XUKfK4" caption="Dilijan National Park." />

My next stop after Lake Sevan was Dilijan, a small town in the middle of the
Dilijan National Park. I found a trail up Mount Andzavabatsat that was described
as «hard», so I only prepared to summit it and then go back down again. It
wasn’t that hard and I reached the top much earlier than expected, so I
continued deeper into the mountains. In the end I made it all the way to
Arevlyan Ayrikar (2767m).

<Group>
  <Image
    span={[12, 8]}
    aspectRatio={6 / 4}
    blobId="3BpXTWiRCWRB513AMu4jUvRjK5HAmgUA6wQeMdT1CnBA"
    caption="Jukhtakvank Monastery."
  />
  <Image
    span={[12, 4]}
    aspectRatio={6 / 4}
    blobId="AEYxCLoPtm9aPry4ewr8LH47C2sqFapuJkiaaJgZYTML"
    caption="Fresh cheese. Yummy."
  />
  <Image span={[12, 4]} aspectRatio={5 / 4} blobId="61KG2WKtnUx5S7SiTKzTgFmHXdKU3M7cnz7QYHE5EsyK" />
  <Image span={[12, 8]} aspectRatio={7 / 4} blobId="HjCLtKaS94EyAzAb5WArY8cC8oRYVALESqvyQba49Nzt" />
</Group>

On my way back down a farmer gave me a lift as he was bringing cheese down to
sell in Dilijan. Because I saw a sign waning about bears, I asked if there were
any. He said that he had just recently seen a mama bear with two cubs. To my
rhetoric question whether they are dangerous he just gestured a giant paw.

Dilijan doesn’t seem like much, but is actually a pretty nice town. Its location
in the middle of the national park makes it a perfect base to explore the
surrounding mountains. If I had more time I’d stay in Dilijan for longer.

A newly built complex in the west of Dilijan caught my eyes. Upon closer
inspection I found out it’s UWC Dilijan, an international college built in 2014.
It wasn’t the only youth or education related facility I saw in the northern
provinces. The other one was the COAF SMART Center near Debet. Given how remote
and poor the regions are, they offer a remarkable amount of modern education
options for its youth. Most of the financial support is coming from a wealthy
individuals, philantropists, or the diverse Armenian diaspora in the US or
Europe.

<Image size="wide" blobId="5Ws3MoMs6KcYdAsAGM7UvW4iGogLzeZbtgUwybq2RWWK" caption="COAF SMART Center near Debet." />

Dsegh lies on a plateau above the Debed canyon. The village is surrounded by the
canyon on three sides, and hills on one. Hidden behind the slope of one of the
hills is the Tsover Lake. Getting to it is only possible over an unremarkable,
unpaved road. And so I was surprised to find so many people there - on a Monday
afternoon, at 4pm. There was even a bar, with nice outside seating. This is a
place surely only locals know, as looking at a map doesn’t reveal any of that.

<Group>
  <Image
    span={[12, 8]}
    aspectRatio={7 / 4}
    blobId="BMrhQGtEHNwd53ZAD64CaXuc9bk4HUvVxTfunb8BUK59"
    caption="Fields around Dsegh."
  />
  <Image span={[12, 4]} aspectRatio={5 / 3} blobId="7hJrG28MdAfE8RrwUDn8jYBCbM1ehqmyrhXGF7we3VCn" caption="1984" />
</Group>

I was still getting used to what kind of roads people were willing to travel
across to get to these places. Most tourists probably wouldn’t think of going
down that road and discard it as an agricultural access road or something
similar. It was a lesson for me: to not take the appearance of the roads as
indication what beauty may lie at the end of them.

<Image size="wide" blobId="C9H8j9RqMtk9DsGWmAU39hKqaBREdcLi3Lugw4gMhk7z" caption="Tsover Lake" />

Soon after I arrived an autumn thunderstorm passed over our heads and everyone
has gone home. I was left alone. Later in the evening I was joined by some young
folks who had the same idea as me, to camp by the lake. They came after sunset,
pitched their tents, started a fire and stayed for the night.

<Group>
  <Image
    span={[12, 5]}
    aspectRatio={5 / 4}
    blobId="8BmJa8mqfCn3QS9hm9TKCR5etoZHtbeddCdnfEUb2HED"
    caption="Debed Canyon."
  />
  <Image span={[12, 7]} aspectRatio={9 / 4} blobId="CbAA5a6fa9Qdb7E6gCnfNVx5UXbAxwLXGxAP5PDDMqYV" />
  <Image span={[12, 8]} aspectRatio={8 / 4} blobId="J6mezncAkmNmkrma97q7WQobqCZui2wftK7iiTQk2NFc" />
  <Image
    span={[12, 4]}
    aspectRatio={5 / 4}
    blobId="GfRPAyPtHAgkm3fZRMPxoLDvmm6F2h5XaoEJmu2U9UJS"
    caption="Ruins of the Surb Grigor Bardzrakash Monastery."
  />
  <Image
    span={[12, 4]}
    aspectRatio={4 / 4}
    blobId="98G3fkTt91YPeVVpE88TQ6845inQgBi1tijYRbEC9ETs"
    caption="Debed Canyon."
  />
  <Image span={[12, 8]} aspectRatio={8 / 3} blobId="A5EZKEMasPFiXFE2Xo6zY58x5WVXZ3x17828asuDGASt" />
</Group>

Armenian people are very friendly. They won’t hesitate to offer help, or food,
or shots of clear distilled alcoholic beverage. It’s their culture. I would
often stop by the side of a road, get out of the car and just look around. Or
roam through a village to stretch my legs and snap a few pictures. Many times
people approached me and asked if I’m lost. Or I was even invited to follow them
to their home because I looked hungry, offered a seat at their dining table and
served food. Something like that just wouldn’t happen in Western Europe.

Their warmth is contrasted by fear. Some people I've talked to expressed genuine
fear of being exterminated by their enemies in the ongoing conflict with
Azerbaijan. I knew about the conflict, but western media rarely reports on
details of conflicts that seem tangential at best. Talking with locals gives you
a whole other picture. Unfiltered. Raw. Emotional.

<Group>
  <Image
    span={[12, 4]}
    aspectRatio={3 / 4}
    blobId="94CwSoC6ZdyDJof7juAxMo9gpyUkhKDhZgSTDeeYrz2Z"
    caption="Abandoned bus on the southern shore of Lake Sevan."
  />
  <Image
    span={[12, 7]}
    aspectRatio={6 / 4}
    blobId="EGgEeVBRsHN8Fj286RtxmzJm3n2sPnwAupu5bav2EQVY"
    caption="Working from the Debed Co-living & Workation House."
  />
</Group>

It was at first unbelievable to think that someone could have that fear. But
Armenians have survived one genocide not too long ago, and genocides are still
happening all across the world. It’s not beyond my imagination that the next one
could be happening right at the doorsteps to Europe. I'm aware that what I
experienced is just one side of a two-sided conflict. Still, that dosen't
diminish what I saw and heard.

For the first two weeks, I didn’t really notice the conflict. Except for the one
guest in the hostel in Yerevan who told me he just recently left the compulsory
military service during which he was active fighting in the Nagorno-Karabakh
region. And then there were the three older men I met on a hike in the hills
above Debet, one of whom showed me bullet wounds sustained on that day almost a
year ago. That would’ve been right at the very beginning of the Second
Nagorno-Karabakh War that started on September 27, 2020. A quick glance at my
watch revealed that I’d be near that region exactly one year later.

<Group>
  <Image span={[12, 9]} aspectRatio={9 / 3} blobId="7xjs8bsvUqSVwkMZo693J2tzg9zJZrpLhuJ69ASwQw9r" />
  <Image
    span={[12, 3]}
    aspectRatio={2 / 3}
    blobId="9DRAeauWy4C5x6Dh3YhtMDKCpKV6GZ3HPtuDJXyKCeDn"
    caption="View on Artabuynk from the Smbataberd fortress."
  />
</Group>

There is no point in trying to get far away from the conflict zone. Armenia is a
tiny country, there are few places from which you don’t see at least one of the
borders with its surrounding neighbours. Two of these neighbours are their
enemies. Taking photos where the border is visible at all is not a good idea,
particularly not if you at some point get detained by the military. But it’s
almost inevitable (the taking photos of the border, it’s definitely avoidable
getting detained by the military). Any direction you point your camera to has a
good chance that a border will be visible.

I didn’t plan on being detained. But it happened. 18 hours later I had all my
belongings again and was free to go. That episode left me with mixed feelings.
The situation itself was tense, at times I had no idea what was happening around
me or what would happen the next minute. Spending the evening and following
morning in an office at a military base, surrounded by a half a dozen officers
and a translator was a whole level up from being stuck at a police station in
Kyrgyzstan for two hours.

<Group>
  <Image
    span={[12, 7]}
    aspectRatio={5 / 3}
    blobId="FAvaVPc9qFP5MnaLeNtw4GG8TJf6VV7VVivhXFkk3yHA"
    caption="On a late night walk in Vayk."
  />
  <Image
    span={[12, 5]}
    aspectRatio={2 / 2}
    blobId="8DsrxxyTRpd9QUgtbrUuqDXjY29bR9RLAqFueQ4jFsxK"
    caption="Gavit of St. Karapet, Noravank Monastery."
  />
</Group>

The soldiers who first detained me were super friendly though, I have no
complaints there. They were strict, firm, but offered me tea, coffee, sweets,
and even asked if I’m hungry and want to eat. That contrast was uncanny. The mix
of them forcing me to sit in a car for two hours, not even allowing me to
stretch my legs, but then turning around and bringing me tea and chocolate. Or
telling me in no uncertain terms not to smile because at one point their
incompetence made the whole situation too funny for me not to, but then
insisting on me having some biscuits before we embark on our way from the border
post to the military base in the province capital.

The sweets were good, as is to be expected everywhere in the former Soviet Union
countries. I wish I brought some back.

<Image size="wide" blobId="5LigwbeygP3QhBDAXK7gj9Hfe1yuLodaz1MHTi1DHhin" />

Most people in Armenia don’t speak English. That also applied to the soldier who
was driving my car that evening. By that time it’s been a while since I was able
to relieve myself the last time, and the ample cups of tea and coffee didn’t
help my situation. The language barrier was making it really difficult for me to
ask him to stop the car by the side of the road so I could have a piss. No
amount of English, German, or Czech words seemed to do the trick. His reply was
always that there will be someone in the place we were heading to who speaks
English and can translate. I couldn’t wait that long. A few hand gestures
towards my groin region made him finally understand.

I still remember standing by the side of the road for what seemed like 5
minutes, staring at the clear sky. For a brief moment in time I forgot what
serious situation I was in.

<Group>
  <Image span={[12, 4]} aspectRatio={5 / 4} blobId="4rhsnA914fX1mfRwHaQ6FHfkRuBxfGZQFewZSwczDpN2" />
  <Image span={[12, 4]} aspectRatio={5 / 4} blobId="DfD2VhBPbUJvNRHGnmTdwKkiA8dBx1tjPDewKnxwA2TC" />
  <Image span={[12, 4]} aspectRatio={5 / 4} blobId="B9FVcgifY4jCMCb2kp71o66gVTQJiKsrm3bPaKX3JyD7" />
</Group>

The officers all felt a bit disorganized, as if they didn’t know what to do with
me. And what they were doing was glaringly wasteful, there was little common
sense to be seen in their actions. When their investigation was over, no more
questions to ask, no more WhatsApp messages to go through, no more pictures to
delete, I told them they it could’ve been all over in an hour if they didn’t
waste that much time. I don’t think they expected me to be so bold and give them
feedback, negative feedback specifically.

Their response was that I should be happy it was over so quickly, that usually
it takes longer. And that they were not as cruel as Azerbaijan, they didn’t
detain me indefinitely. A reference to russian blogger Aleksandr Lapshin who was
jailed and almost murdered by Azerbaijan. It was like saying «We’re not as bad
as North Korea, we didn’t kill you». A pretty fucking low bar to have, comparing
yourself with the worst of the worst on this earth.

Since they got my address, I asked them whether I will receive a postcard from
them. They just laughed at me. Well, there’s a parcel on its way, packed with
five pounds of Swiss chocolate. I hope I got the address right since they didn’t
give me theirs.

That’s what good friends do.

We’re friends now, right?

Right… ?

<Image
  size="full"
  blobId="EZo7bbvxF2sCpKdeB4LjSnhSrrkvH4dPXB4LSwz4SdCZ"
  caption="Early morning view from the vicinity of Azhdahak on Mount Ararat."
/>

From Debet Canyon I continued clockwise around Lake Sevan. The beaches were
empty, bars closed. I have not seen anyone except another shepherd climbing the
slopes of Mount Artanish.

Interest in sustainable energy production can be seen everywhere. The large
commercial photovoltaic power plant north of Mount Artanish was just one of many
signs. I’ve also seen many private photovoltaic installations, and most houses
outside of larger cities have solar water heaters on the roofs.

<Image
  size="wide"
  blobId="FGxD5f2JCVWM5vNQn2BWFPBWJy1C2wMJbddttLNY43SU"
  caption="Shepherd on the slopes of Mount Artanish, overlookig Lake Sevan."
/>

There aren’t many train tracks in Armenia. Most seem for industrial use, or have
long been abandoned. Despite that I was always cautious when crossing tracks.
Then one train almost hit me. Incidentally the only working train I ever saw in
Armenia. While crossing a track near Vardenis I looked to my right and saw the
front face of a locomotive not more than 100 meters away, approaching with
decent speed. A prompt slam on the gas pedal took me out of immediate danger.
The encounter left me strangely unaffected, and I continued along the southern
shore of Lake Sevan in direction of Martuni.

<Image
  size="wide"
  blobId="3ukTmoBjDwotXT363NaXemRBCp9PpVscDR9o58qgSkyJ"
  caption="View on Lake Sevan from Mount Artanish."
/>

Waste disposal is only available in larger cities, and so most throw their trash
into a ditch behind their village. In regions where waste disposal services are
not available, and environmentally responsible people go to lengths to transport
their waste to the provincial capital, so that it is not left out for nature to
deal with, end up doing something illegal. In the eyes of the law they are
disposing the waste in another district and that is not allowed. The whole
situation is bonkers, the government doesn’t provide any means for proper waste
disposal, and if people want to do it themselves they risk being punished.

There also didn't seem to be any effort in trying to cut down on the waste they
produce. In every shop I was given a single-use plastic bag, even if I bought
just two items. They looked at me in disbelief when I told them I'd carry the
few items in my bare hands.

There seems to be zero interest in the general population for solving that
environmental issue. I can imagine if children grow up in such an environment it
all seems natural to them and nothing to worry about.

<Group>
  <Image span={[12, 7]} aspectRatio={6 / 4} blobId="6rLCrCuuGKM53TfH1SbYe15EkLJBAS9GmjBEAewVtTuR" caption="Sisian." />
  <Image span={[12, 5]} aspectRatio={5 / 4} blobId="7Q2rE1gRPwdbLtHv5AQ8nqpNqD56RRsCALpuzmCN1DxV" caption="Kapan." />
  <Image span={[12, 6]} aspectRatio={5 / 4} blobId="Fs1WDq72LdtHKSCFKKGxdVXxTnTFombsetrNpW68f3cP" caption="Artashat." />
  <Image
    span={[12, 6]}
    aspectRatio={5 / 4}
    blobId="7kn99WdTbsa6jYhaixaj1pN8qJFzKGDu9ZimWX7hqgUN"
    caption="Yeghegnadzor."
  />
</Group>

Mount Armaghan is one of those seemingly uninteresting mountains that when you
look closer at are worth visiting. It is located to the south of Martuni, off of
the road that leads to Getap. The peak offers a nice view in all directions, has
a church at the top (if you’re into that), a building on the shores of the lake
in the middle of the crater that offers shade and a few tables to sit at, and
the obligatory fire pit. Unfortunately in late autumn the crater lake was dried
up. In spring or summer when water is plentiful it surely is a nice place to
spend the day.

Getting to the top was a challenge. Even though Google Maps shows a road to the
top, it’s one of those dirt roads that’s only suitable for off-road vehicles. I
had a SUV, but still there were sections where two of its four wheels were half
a meter above ground. Dirt roads get washed out during rains, and it was common
that dirt roads would split and I’d be presented with multiple choices how to
continue. I had to choose wisely.

<Image
  size="wide"
  blobId="F8GCpS9PvAeuZ6Md1fcYATXnNU86uBhVepwwdWKQdGnL"
  caption="The crater lake in Mount Armaghan was dried up. Mount Ararat is visible in the far back."
/>

I was lucky to make it all the way to the top. On my way down I met a couple who
had to park their car half-way up the mountain because their car couldn’t make
it past one particular section which required 4WD and high ground clearance.

The Vardenyats Mountain Pass to the south of Mount Armaghan marks the border
between the Gegharkunik Province in the north and Vayots Dzor Province in the
south. Standing at the top of the pass, the view opens up to a long and all year
round green valley in the south. The very southern end of the valley connects to
the main corridor between Yerevan and the southern provinces. Half-way through
descending into the valley I turned off the main road to visit the Smbataberd
fortress.

<Group>
  <Image span={[12, 5]} aspectRatio={1} blobId="8utg7aq9vEbhrX9ee13jqSfbH7HpBhVG8wM3bbq7f5qw" />
  <Image span={[12, 7]} aspectRatio={4 / 3} blobId="GB8rkAbXzEYN6J7nvC5d3P8GmSM8a8AV3FpGUZUUrbos" />
</Group>

As I was waiting for the sunset at the Smbataberd fortress, sitting alone on the
high fortress walls, I heard two Czech voices. I didn’t reveal my knowledge of
the language until one of them mentioned that he «can’t find it». Me being a
naturally helpful creature asked – in czech – what it was that they were looking
for. Whenever I do this, it’s almost always followed by «Sorry I didn’t
understand you» (in english). Only after I repeat my question in czech they
finally realize what’s happening.

They took a different approach to discovering Armenia. They rented a car and
were trying to find as many geocaches as possible. It’s a neat idea, these
caches are usually located in interesting places. Historically significant
sites, natural monuments etc. They found the cache and a few minutes later were
gone to race to the next one.

<Image
  size="wide"
  blobId="8TM64ZL42LNiZqMYoZ9P6YNcGH25NugJr17DkCQa8CwQ"
  caption="Early morning mist near Masis. The sun has risen just enough to illuminate the top of Mount Ararat."
/>

From Smbataberd I had two options how to continue to the south. Either along the
main road through Sharon and Getap, or over a backcountry road through
Karmrashen.

Before I left Switzerland I had studied the country using Google Maps satellite
images. The area to the south-west of Karmrashen is distinctively flat and
featureless, except for one clearly visible round mountain of volcanic origin
just a few kilometres to the south-west of the village. Upon closer inspection I
noticed that the mountain has a label and reviews, which indicates a frequently
visited place. The pictures around that area looked nice, and so it landed on my
favorites list. It was clear which way I’d continue.

<Image blobId="2WkzgeHBjYAdWFTmZ6vyC1qgPpA9zqnzjf4pxzw3dF6V" caption="Thick fog on the road between Tatev and Kapan." />

Karmrashen was one of the poorest villages I saw in Armenia. A few old block
houses from the 70s along the main street, farmhouses scattered around that, a
few lonely cows, dogs barking from all sides, rusting farming equipment from the
soviet era. Most houses seemed abandoned, except for the two apartments which
were clearly still occupied as evidenced by the fresh laundry and green plants
hanging from their balconies.

Not long after I stopped my white-with-a-thin-layer-of-dust Honda in the middle
of the village, spread out my solar cells to charge my battery, and stepped out
into the warming sun to attend our weekly company meeting, I noticed two
children peeking at me. They were following me at a distance while I was
listening to everyone else on my team explain what they were planning to do that
week.

<Group>
  <Image span={[12, 4]} aspectRatio={5 / 4} blobId="5BsBgCpkoTyjsD3UNAbCjaervzf59N3VuUfgc1NzXifL" />
  <Image span={[12, 4]} aspectRatio={5 / 4} blobId="GD2C8UmFJNtCWkoqDKtV19QrbvsybXrRPuACYpfdALf6" />
  <Image span={[12, 4]} aspectRatio={5 / 4} blobId="HsRcuTiDYWTJjjXcskjbhw4MkLMwKwB6qDfXjwA6z1rJ" />
</Group>

The people in the Karmrashen seemed poor, and the village itself is quite far
from the next major city. Yet access to internet was spotless. 4G is almost
omnipresent in Armenia. Only in very remote places I couldn’t get any signal. As
long as I had a village in sight, there was a good chance that I'd also have
access to internet.

And it was cheap! I paid 3000 dram (6.30 USD, 5.77 CHF, 5.41 EUR) for one month
of unlimited 4G.

The only difference between Europe and Armenia in terms of internet quality I
noticed was the increased roundtrip time to the US. It went up from ~150ms to
~250ms. This does not seem much, but some websites became remarkably slower. It
made me appreciate developers who put in the effort not to waste their users
bandwidth and time.

<Image size="full" blobId="2UJtZcW8yMVQaBqErXBXnhN51NLqT5uYfbmvd36c5Q3K" caption="" />

Vayots Sar is a round mountain of volcanic origin to the south-west of
Karmrashen. The road to the top is steep. The SUV was struggling to climb the
more than 15 degrees incline, but we eventually made it. The flats to the
south-east, surrounded by mountain ranges on two sides form a corridor that
directed my eyes towards Mount Ararat.

Later that evening another car joined me. A group of young Russian women with a
guide drove up the mountain to enjoy the sunset. Their guide was the only one
speaking English, and made sure to mention to me which ones of them are single.

<Image size="wide" blobId="EnvZECFkrMmqVdASnSrMrdXciwZrTDCrppCck4GbiowX" caption="Vayots Sar." />

They definitely had a better car than I, and the guide was surprised that the
SUV I was driving made it all the way to the top. They also came better
prepared, had a stove to brew fresh coffee, and the obligatory shots of
alcoholic beverage.

The only other visitor we saw was a military helicopter that approached the
mountain, circled once around, and then continued towards the east.

<Image
  size="wide"
  blobId="AybFfjW4AEeHPPQSQBPDKHsdjT944pBihC7eoJndq6Eh"
  caption="This large soviet-era monument marks the highest point of the Vorotan Pass."
/>

After Vayots Sar I drove to the south to join the main corridor and continue to
the east. The Vorotan Pass, at 2350 meters above sea level, marks the border
between Vayots Dzor and Syunik Provinces. A lone vendor was selling tea and
fruits by the large soviet-era monument that spans both sides of the road at the
highest point of the pass. I bought a few supplies for the road ahead.

The Syunik Province didn’t offer anything particularly interesting. It was
distinctively colder than in the other provinces, but perhaps it was just a sign
of autumn arriving in the country.

<Image
  size="wide"
  blobId="F48vKhBxh7fchYGNEpsSNNRpeAWsSCwFLmYRjXLedrFh"
  caption="Two children playing on the main street in Semyonovka."
/>

Few gas stations accept credit cards. Outside of Yerevan I came across just one,
and the operator only reluctantly agreed. He also had trouble getting the
payment terminal to work, an indication that it’s not used much. At gas stations
that don’t accept credit cards I had to tell the operator how much I want to
spend. At first I had no idea how many litres fit into the tank, let alone
drams. Eventually I found out that for 20’000 dram I’d get between two thirds or
three quarters of a tank. Gas definitely wasn’t cheap.

As I was driving through Shinuhayr I was running really low on gas and didn’t
see any gas station ahead of me. I also didn’t want to drive 20km back to the
nearest one that was indicated on my map. So I asked a guy standing besides one
of the many car wash stations if he knew where to get gas. He pointed towards
one of the side roads, and waved his hand to follow him. So I slowly drove
behind him, 50 meters into the side road he stopped in front of a residential
house with a makeshift car shop attached to it.

Out came a guy and asked how many litres I want. I glanced at my fuel level
gauge and guessed that I’d need about 30. He disappeared into the house and came
back out a minute later with a bucket and funnel. I understood that it’s about
10 litres. Two more buckets were brought and I handed over 15’000 dram. It
wasn’t the best deal and I had no idea about the quality. But my tank was full
again and the car didn’t give me any problems with that load of gas. All in all,
I was a happy customer. On my way back through the town I tried to buy from him
again, but he wasn’t home.

<Image size="wide" blobId="HbAZbwxwxaVZLEydU7bhu8p86xgdL6Fdw7Ay4fy3YD6n" caption="Road between Kapan and Meghri." />

Most tourists only go as far as Halidzor, where they hop onto the Wings of Tatev
– the longest reversible aerial tramway. For those only wanting to go to the
Tatev monastery, the tramway is a better option than driving through the gorge,
a few hundred meters down and up over tightly winding roads. I wanted to
continue further to the south, to Kapan and beyond, so I skipped the tramway.
Unfortunately during my crossing thick clouds had filled the gorge and couldn’t
see much. I was hoping for a nicer weather on my way back.

<Image
  blobId="3gRmQJkxP5M1JEzf57ViSspxigvvf97DNdbqBTZkZroF"
  caption="A cat is giving me company during a rest stop while crossing the Syunik Province."
/>

Everywhere I went I felt watched. People were turning around to have a second
look at me. As if they were seeing a ghost. Was it the first time they saw a
tall, blonde man with long hair? My looks was indeed an outlier amongst the
dark-haired population. I quickly got used to it. Looking differently is
something I simply have to accept as someone traveling outside of Europe.

One thing I didn’t get used to was to have a personal shopping assistant almost
every time I stepped into a grocery store. The stores work the same as in
Europe: you take a basket, walk around and put stuff into the basket, before you
leave the store you pay for all items in the basket at the counter. They either
didn’t trust me to follow that well-established process, or they were curious
what a lone westerner buys. Either way, one of the clerks would follow me and
watch my every step. A smile every now and then reassured them that I’m still
fine and don’t need any help.

<Image size="wide" blobId="ApZdnz8wSCzd9FQStYMKvwviUqCSWj8xbLdXUn7ktuGx" caption="On a trail above Artavan." />

Because many roads are unpaved and in autumn the weather was dry, dust quickly
collected on the car. Yet most cars I saw on the roads were sparkling clean.
That is because the country has more car wash stations than gas pumps. They are
conveniently placed and easy to use. During the four weeks in the country I
washed the car at least four times. A quick spray of foam, followed by a splash
of water and the car looked like new. It took less than 10 minutes, and cost
only a few hundred dram.

I doubt that the wastewater is treated in any way, most of the chemicals likely
end up in rivers. Considering how aggressive the foam was in dissolving the
dirt, I can’t imagine it being any good for the environment. What isn’t absorbed
by the soil flows into the Aras river and eventually into the Caspian Sea.

In Kapan the first signs that I was nearing Iran were starting to show. Prices
in hotels were written in both dram and in rial. And prices were also much
lower: 10’000 dram for a night in a hotel really wasn’t much. The low prices
were also reflected in the service quality, unfortunately. One evening at the
hotel restaurant I picked a few items from the menu, only to be told that most
of the dishes are not available. Neither were my backup choices. In the end, I
had little to say in what I’d eat. At least borscht was available, I was really
looking forward for that.

On the very south Armenia shares about 30km of border with Iran. Two roads lead
from Kapan to the border. I took the western road down, in the hopes to take the
eastern road back up to Kapan. Though I wasn’t sure if the eastern road was open
for civilian traffic, Google Maps shows parts of it veering into Azerbaijan.

<Group>
  <Image
    span={[12, 6]}
    aspectRatio={5 / 3}
    blobId="6qsm2ZvAnmNS1ze6yEgWHw2HwvBQpULQxyCfQWuZdNjS"
    caption="Meghri in southern Armenia, near the border with Iran. The mountains in the far back are on Iranian territory."
  />
  <Image
    span={[12, 6]}
    aspectRatio={5 / 3}
    blobId="H2jRsYQdh5EaTPZ5YrWvEzLmiyLtQEj1u8nA4A9SiwTF"
    caption="The Aras river marks the border between Armenia (on the right) and Iran (on the left)."
  />
</Group>

Armenia and Iran maintain friendly relations, and so a constant stream of trucks
were crossing the border near Meghri. Spotting Iranian trucks was easy, their
license plates are printed in Arabic script, black on yellow background.

I hadn’t planned to enter Iran, I wasn't allowed to drive there with my rental
car anyway. And getting the visa would take a few days which I didn’t want to
spend waiting at the border. I stayed one day in Meghri, and then continued back
towards Kapan.

The other road from Meghri to Kapan first goes eastwards for about 10 km,
hugging the Armenia-Iran border, then turns north. Shortly before the turn to
the north I was stopped at a checkpoint. The soldier looked at my passport, then
into the trunk of my car, and let me through. The only thing he told me is if
I’m sure I want to go that way, because the road would have many curves. I
wasn’t concerned by that at all.

<Image size="wide" blobId="HiXL8VV6ySDgApJ5qWES3bSyX6K15VMGi5S14GkngWr3" caption="Lenticular clouds above Lake Sevan" />

As I was returning to the north, the weather hadn’t improved much, it was still
wet and foggy. The whole region in the south – Syunik Province – appeared to
have a peculiar climate. Mornings were often clear and in late afternoon clouds
and fog started to push into the region from the north-east. At times the fog
was so dense that I couldn’t see the road in front of the car. When looking at
satellite images, I noticed that north and east facing slopes in that region are
green, while the opposite slopes are barren. A constant push of moist air from
the direction of the Caspian Sea would explain that.

The way back through the Syunik Province was unremarkable. I was happy to cross
the Vorotan Pass once again, as the temperatures increased again the further to
the west I going.

The slopes around the Areni are covered in vineyards, the town is known for its
wine production. Every year they organize the Areni Wine Festival, unfortunately
I missed it by one day. All wine factories offer tours which is just as good
opportunity to get drunk.

<Image
  size="narrow"
  blobId="D6yab5wyXSXko3UVms4ToVfUAGepQJMfYuZZFBJAty6W"
  caption="One of the many wine factories in Areni."
/>

Just east of Areni is the Areni-1 Cave, a significant archeological site from
the Bronze Age, where the oldest oldest brain, shoe, and winery in the world
have been found. The cave is right at the intersection where the road to the
Noravank Monastery splits off of the main road. Most monasteries in Armenia look
similar, they differ only by how well they have been restored. If you’ve seen
two you’ve seen pretty much all there is to see. I as not religiously inclined
person soon stopped visiting them, there simply are too many. The Noravank
Monastery was one of the few that were on my list. It’s for sure one of the
better preserved ones, and easy to get to.

The HIKEArmenia app was useful throughout my whole stay. Looking at the map view
revealed a few clusters of trails in various regions. One around Dilijan, one
along the Debed canyon, one to the east of Vayk, and a few more. I used these
clusters to decide in which regions I should stay a bit longer.

<Group>
  <Image
    span={[12, 7]}
    aspectRatio={5 / 3}
    blobId="3U1fB7iZmxBWhwLxc9A1x9e5W3qyb7k78c2NNanNxo8h"
    caption="Chumov Lake above Old Martiros."
  />
  <Image
    span={[12, 5]}
    aspectRatio={4 / 3}
    blobId="9iaHxU61sknS7uG5BqUXqA7sySH4DG38wW8DfU3sw5kB"
    caption="Apple tree next to a trail above Artavan."
  />
</Group>

The region around the Noravank Monastery has three different trails marked. I
had planned to hike one of them the day I was detained. That hiking in Armenia
could be dangerous never crossed my mind. The only real danger I was considering
were wild animals, bears specifically. I did hear wolves during some nights, but
they don’t pose any danger to humans. During the first couple minutes I was
detained I briefly stepped a few meters off the road, and was immediately called
back by the soldiers. Not because they thought I’d run away, as I first
suspected, but because I was told that there could be landmines.

The potential of landmines near marked trails is something that the HIKEArmenia
app failed to notify me about. I think it’s a rather important information to
mention in the trail descriptions.

The landmines didn’t move me at all, figuratively and literally. But now as I’m
writing down this story, thinking about it sends chills down my spine. I’m
sitting in a safe place, a cafe in Zurich, people are walking in the streets,
mindlessly, unconcerned about their every step. And there I was one wrong move
away from being blown up in the air.

<Image size="narrow" blobId="9dV7mp1riHZHCtHCXwkU1rNVpabtNU6bz2fkpYE5V2Yc" caption="Angel’s Canyon." />

My way back to Yerevan led me through the town of Vedi, where I left the main
road to go explore the Angel’s Canyon. Around Vedi are the last hills before the
landscape opens up to reveal the Ararat plain surrounding the Aras river.

Perhaps the nicest historical building I saw up close was the Temple of Garni.
It isn’t just the temple itself that is beautiful, but also its location, on the
edge of a cliff. The sunset was stunning. No wonder the architects picked that
particular location to build it. Both sides of the gorge below the temple are
supported by huge walls of basalt columns which the locals aptly call «Symphony
of the Stones».

I had been in Armenia a few weeks by that time first signs of winter started to
show. Nights were colder, mountain peaks were covered in white.

<Group>
  <Image
    span={[12, 7]}
    aspectRatio={7 / 4}
    blobId="Dc5CJM3H93cvz4e1ZVNWb8pv99Q8PZ9BoHEPEkZ7xiYB"
    caption="Garni Temple."
  />
  <Image
    span={[12, 5]}
    aspectRatio={5 / 4}
    blobId="DQr3fnX63eRNPCFL3xMRqGNxuM6na99w9tbsmGq3zbLn"
    caption="Symphony of the Stones, Garni."
  />
  <Image
    span={[12, 5]}
    aspectRatio={5 / 4}
    blobId="BUEv4jr4r7gs4Dkbdt9AkWKED8hNbWb82DJ5e69XPXpy"
    caption="Breakfast before heading out into the Gegham Mountains to climb Mount Azhdahak."
  />
  <Image
    span={[12, 7]}
    aspectRatio={7 / 4}
    blobId="HRSZwruqfh4gkirfYFVf2zsWC8PhMptxc2V7mf8u4LCx"
    caption="Sunset from the Gegham Mountains."
  />
</Group>

The Ararat plain and Lake Sevan are separated by the Gegham Mountains. The
highest point is Azhdahak at 3597 m above sea. Several trails lead into this
area both from the north (Lake Sevan), and from the south (starting just behind
Garni). Azhdahak was the last mountain I wanted to climb, but wasn’t sure
whether I’d make it. It is usually done as a two day trip, as it lies some 20
kilometres behind the end of the paved road in Geghard. I decided to drive as
far as the car would take me across the dirt roads, and walk the rest. I was
lucky and barely made it across some pretty sketchy sections. Once I reached the
snow limit and couldn’t drive any further, I parked my car and walked the rest
on foot.

<Clip
  clip={{
    id: "",
    blob: {
      url: "https://storage.googleapis.com/stories.caurea.org/blouson-noir/JALshkPrYq1SSTXE8Jm5P6gy2yorKUJhwzZuuieCmRXR/720p.mp4",
    },
    poster: importImage(
      "https://storage.googleapis.com/stories.caurea.org/blouson-noir/JALshkPrYq1SSTXE8Jm5P6gy2yorKUJhwzZuuieCmRXR/poster.png"
    ),
  }}
/>

The view was so beautiful that I didn’t want to go back down. But I couldn’t
stay on the mountain, I knew the night would get cold. As the sun was setting on
that clear and calm night, the snow started to freeze. I love the sound frozen
snow crunching beneath my feet. It was pitch black when I finally reached my
car.

<Image size="full" blobId="9fDni51jxEPt71dk5dPjf1hN4SFqb3pivNcpyb4a3YXS" caption="Crater lake in Mount Azhdahak." />

As the end was nearing, I calculated that I’d have two extra days, and so I
extended my trip all the way to Gyumri, the second-largest city in Armenia. It
lies about 100 km to the north-west of Yerevan, with Mount Aragats straight in
the middle between the two. It is not a particularly interesting city, though
it’s pretty decent place to work from. I didn’t have any trouble at all finding
cafes and a hotel. The city has a similar vibe as Yerevan, even if it’s notably
smallera

<Image blobId="CYvQTKqb8gt8b36a9MuD8b9M9BqHVa4bCs1vXHRFKVQn" caption="Gas-powered bus in Gyumri." />

Even small villages have a well equiped childrens playground, or permanently
installed amusement park. Often close to the city center. That sounds great,
unfortunately many of the playgrounds and parks are in desolate condition. The
equipment rusting and falling apart.

From Garni to Gyumri I took the road south of Mount Aragats, through Armavir,
Karakert, Aragatsavan. For my way back from Guymri to Yerevan I took the road
north of Mount Aragats, through Artik, Alagyaz, Aparan, and Kuchak.

My last night before returning to Yerevan I camped on the shores of the Aparan
Reservoir. Temperatures during night dropped near zero and people started to
heat their homes. The preferred heating technology in villages is «homemade
biomass» (a fancy word for cow dung), which results in lots of smog during the
evening hours, particularly if there is an inversion that keeps the dirty air
trapped near the ground. The smell reminded me of my first days in Bishkek. I
feel pity for the people who live there and can’t escape it. By the next morning
the air was clean again.

<Image blobId="6nr1xEqiTUz5VWPA92y77k2kyicg2PxiP79wviNXev4r" caption="Aparan Reservoir." />

From that location I saw a tall structure on the horizon. Upon closer look I
recognized it as the giant iron cross I mentioned in the beginning. After only a
few minutes of driving I reached it. I was on familiar group again, I had made a
full circle around Armenia.

The rest of the day I spent driving back to Yerevan. I checked into a hotel and
returned the car. The two last nights in Armenia were before me. I had a coffee
with a friend who I met earlier in Debet and got some more tips about Armenia in
case I ever return.

<Image size="wide" blobId="9WJ94nwjaHij7T23ZxgeEv7XQHiTPdPnaaBCK283cKJM" caption="Eastern edge of Lake Sevan." />

Flights to the west usually leave very early in the morning. It didn’t make
sense to sleep that night, so after a lovely dinner we went to visit the local
clubs in Yerevan. The clubs were packed with people. Like if COVID-19 had never
reached Armenia.

A woman in the Calumet Ethnic Lounge Bar told me that she recognised me from
some time earlier. I was surprised, but only slightly so. I was an outlier in
this small country, after all.

<Image size="narrow" blobId="7eM6asoDHkrbRHaaKKwpLYdxisX4Drkz4WXKWfwWYsAA" caption="Somewhere in Armenia." />

> My blackness calls me back.
